# Spray Routils

## Access Logging

In order to accurately log all access to a Spray Server you need to,
+ Time and log the completion of your routes ([Mathias tells me how][spray-time-custom-directive])
+ Ensure Routes that throw exceptions have their access logged consistently with routes that do not
+ Handle timeouts. ([Spray Timeout Handling][spray-timeout-handling]) doesn't allow you to disambiguate the timeout
event and the completion of the timedout route. [see this Google Groups Discussion for background][spray-timeout-discussion])

The ```LogAccessRouting``` Spray Routing trait takes care of all of these access logging edge cases.

Included is a demo that you can use to test this behaviour. It runs from within sbt using ```sbt-revolver``` and uses
a custom logger based on a suffix of the [Common Log Format][common-log-format]. (There are also automated integration 
tests of the same behaviour.) 

### Demo a Server that responds within the timeout

```reStart 1000 500``` will start a server with a ```request-timeout``` of 1000ms and a sleep before responding of 
500ms. Going to ```http://localhost:8085/hello``` will print,

```
spray-routils "GET /hello HTTP/1.1" 200 12 580
```


### Demo a Server that times out before responding

```reStart 500 1000``` will start a server with a ```request-timeout``` of 500ms and a sleep before responding of 
1000ms. Going to ```http://localhost:8085/hello``` will print,

```
spray-routils "GET /hello HTTP/1.1" 500 69 500
```

It will also cause a dead letter warning to be created because the response handling actor will shutdown on timeout and
not receive any message received from the timedout request completing


### Demo a Server with a route that always throws an exception

```reStart exception``` and going to ```http://localhost:8085/hello``` will print,

```
spray-routils java.lang.Exception: Test Exception
spray-routils [...]
spray-routils "GET /hello HTTP/1.1" 500 35 125"
```

### Demo a Server with a route that always fails with an Exception

```reStart fail``` and going to ```http://localhost:8085/hello``` will print,

```
spray-routils 	There was an internal server error.: Test Exception
spray-routils 	Completing with '500 Internal Server Error' response
spray-routils "GET /hello HTTP/1.1" 500 35 125"
```

### Including Access Logging in your own Spray Routes

Below is an example snippet showing how you might mix the trait into your own project

```scala
import org.caoilte.spray.routing.LogAccessRoutingActor
import org.caoilte.spray.routing.AccessLogger

class YourAccessLogger extends AccessLogger {
  override def logAccess(request: HttpRequest, response: HttpResponse, time: Long) = ???
    
  override def accessAlreadyLogged(request: HttpRequest, response: HttpResponse, time: Long) = ???
}

class YourHttpService extends LogAccessRoutingActor with Actor {
  val accessLogger:AccessLogger = new YourAccessLogger
}
```

You also need to make sure that you set a ```request timeout``` correctly

```
spray.can {
  server {
    routils-request-timeout = 5 s
    request-timeout = infinite
  }
}
```

The rather convoluted configuration is necessary in order to implement our own timeout handling instead of relying on
Spray's. When a request completes it is impossible to tell if Spray has already timed out the request. This could lead to
a request being access logged as completed when in fact its response was discarded. By implementing our own timeout logic
we can link Timeouts to normal requests and stop Access Log messages from being generated by timed out requests.

[spray-time-custom-directive]: https://groups.google.com/d/msg/spray-user/V5q6kaXfcHY/ioUzYbW8XvoJ "A Spray Custom Directive for timing a Route"
[spray-timeout-handling]: http://spray.io/documentation/1.2.1/spray-routing/key-concepts/timeout-handling/ "Spray Timeout Handling"
[spray-timeout-discussion]: https://groups.google.com/d/msg/spray-user/as_3g7Yl_kI/pJmzB-DXOF0J "Discussion about handling Spray Timeouts"
[common-log-format]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Log_Format "Common Log Format"
